SUMMARY

"The SUPRENUM project ended around 25 years ago. The aim of this large-scale German project, funded by the Ministry of Research, 
was to develop a parallel supercomputer, particularly for large numerical applications. In a joint initiative involving research 
centers, industry, and university expert groups, the aim was to create a scalable computer system that offered true peak performance 
based on a MIMD parallel architecture. In addition to hardware design and implementation, this also required a large number of software 
developments. In fact, around two-thirds of the project costs were spent on software development.

In 1989, the first (“small”) system was presented to great public acclaim at the Hannover Messe Industrie trade fair and celebrated as a
major success. A system with the highest level of expansion was then installed and approved at the GMD in Sankt Augustin in December 1990. 
From 1991 and 1992, a large number of applications were implemented on this fully developed system and extensive performance measurements 
were carried out. The result in a nutshell: With a peak performance of 3.0 GFLOPS (for a matrix multiplication), SUPRENUM was the fastest
MIMD computer in the world at the time.

However, the more significant and lasting breakthroughs were achieved not on the hardware side, but on the software side. The project had
not only a research goal, but also a commercial one. This was one of the conditions formulated by the main industry partners from the outset. 
The SUPRENUM systems manufactured by the industry partner Krupp Atlas Elektronik GmbH were to be procured and used in particular by research 
institutions as high-performance computers. However, apart from the target system for the GMD, only five smaller systems were procured and 
installed by institutions closely involved in the project.

The main reason for this lack of commercial success was that industry and research policy makers could not agree on the financing of the 
further development of the system (SUPRENUM 2). No (genuine) buyer can be found for a (high-performance) system whose future is uncertain.
However, the software developments of the project were successfully marketed by Pallas GmbH and continued in the European GENESIS project 
and later in the EUROPORT project, among others. The parallelization concepts in particular were groundbreaking. They still form the basis
of a large number of large parallel applications today.

This article takes a retrospective look at the technical developments and research policy aspects of the project at the time. Some of the
technical developments appear exceptional in retrospect. Some of the political decisions in the initial phase of the project were courageous
and visionary, while the attitude of industry at the end was rather short-sighted and not very forward-looking."

Source
Univ.-Prof. Dr. Ulrich Trottenberg, 
Priv.-Doz. Dr. habil. Bernhard Thomas, 
InterScience Akademie GmbH

